# Lantern - Monitoring

> [!NOTE]
> Parts of this page are specific to the [BAS Data Catalogue](/docs/architecture.md#bas-data-catalogue).

## Monitoring configuration

These options from the app `lantern.Config` class are used to configure application logging:

- `ENABLE_FEATURE_SENTRY`: if true, enables backend [Error Monitoring](#error-monitoring) via Sentry
- `SENTRY_ENVIRONMENT`: the Sentry [Environment](https://docs.sentry.io/platforms/python/configuration/environments/) name
- `SENTRY_DSN`: Sentry backend Data Source Name (DSN) for error logging

See the [Config](/docs/config.md#config-options) docs for how to set these config options.

## Health monitoring

### Heartbeat

A static text file is available within a [Site](/docs/architecture.md#sites) as a basic, binary, health monitoring
endpoint at: `/static/txt/heartbeat.txt`.

This endpoint MAY be used by monitoring tools and/or load balancers to determine if the static site is available.

A non-200 status code MUST be considered as the static site being unavailable.

### Health check endpoint

A static JSON health check is available within a [Site](/docs/architecture.md#sites), structured as
per the [Draft API Health Check](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-inadarei-api-health-check) specification,
at: `/-/health`.

This endpoint MAY be used by monitoring tools and/or load balancers to determine:

- readiness: to determine if the site can process requests, expected to always be true
- liveness: to determine if the site is running or not, expected to always be true

> [!TIP]
> The health check may be 'live' but not 'ready', during deployments or maintenance for example.

## Sentry

### Error monitoring

Errors in the Python backend (where enabled) and frontend [Static Site](/docs/site.md) (always) are logged to
[Sentry](https://sentry.io) for aggregation and alerting.

- [Sentry Project 🔒](/docs/infrastructure.md#sentry)

Alerts are sent via email and to the `#dev` channel in the MAGIC Teams workspace.

### Uptime checks

A Sentry [Uptime Check](https://docs.sentry.io/product/uptime-monitoring/) checks the
[BAS Map Catalogue](https://data.bas.ac.uk/collections/bas-maps) collection returns a 2xx response in the production
environment every 5 minutes, automatically following the [Item Alias](/docs/models.md#item-aliases) redirect.

### User feedback

Sentry's [User Feedback](https://docs.sentry.io/product/user-feedback/) feature is used to collect user feedback via
a custom [widget](/docs/site.md#user-feedback).

> [!WARNING]
> Sentry user feedback is only retained for 90 days. An anonymous version can be copied to GitLab if needed.

## Plausible

[Plausible](https://plausible.io) is used for recording web analytics in the
[BAS Data Catalogue](/docs/architecture.md#bas-data-catalogue) static site.

- [Plausible Dashboard 🔒](/docs/infrastructure.md#plausible)

## Site checks

[Checks](/docs/models.md#site-checks) can be run from a [Catalogue](/docs/architecture.md#catalogues) to verify the
contents of a [Site](/docs/architecture.md#sites) and downloads referenced in [Records](/docs/models.md#record-checks)
via making URL requests to expected resources.

Checks verify:

- a subset of site resources (CSS, images, etc.)
- guides, legal policies and other global, non-record related pages
- the site 404 page and that the error handler is working (by requesting a page known not to exist)
- [Record](/docs/models.md#records) pages (JSON, XML, HTML)
- [Item](/docs/models.md#items) pages (HTML) and [Aliases](/docs/models.md#item-aliases) redirects
- DOI redirects if set within records
- distribution options set within records (with special handling for ArcGIS layers and services)

> [!WARNING]
> Checks are not run for:
>
> - BAS SAN and SharePoint distribution options within records
> - [Item](/docs/models.md#items) pages in [Trusted Publishing](/docs/architecture.md#trusted-publishing)
> - DOI redirects where not using the live site environment (as these only work in production)

Checks are intended to verify a whole site, including all records within a store, systematically on a regular basis.
Ad-hoc checks for specific records CAN be run as part of record publishing workflows.

Checks are generated in a pending state for site content by [Outputs](/docs/architecture.md#outputs) alongside their
content, via the [Site](/docs/architecture.md#sites) class.

> [!TIP]
> Checks for Record contents are generated by the `RecordChecks` class and included in the checks for the
> [Record ISO XML](/docs/outputs.md#iso-19115-record-xml-output) Output. This attachment is somewhat arbitrary.

Sets of pending checks are executed in parallel using the `lantern.checks.Checker` class, then processed into
[Data](#site-checks-data) and [Report](#site-checks-report) via the [Checks](/docs/outputs.md#checks-output) Output.

Checks are executed using `lantern.checks.CheckRunner` classes, which include methods to make the relevant URL request
depending on the type of check. For example, checks for [Item Aliases](/docs/models.md#item-aliases)) verify the
correct redirect location is given and that this location exists.

> [!NOTE]
> Checks for some distribution options in Records are not implemented, and generated as skipped rather than pending.
> Skipped checks are not executed but are included in compiled data and reports.

### Site checks data

Executed checks are compiled into a JSON data file for machine use and optional additional processing.

Available at: `/-/checks/data.json`

> [!TIP]
> See the [OpenAPI](/docs/site.md#openapi-definition) definition for the schema used for this JSON data.

### Site checks report

Compiled results from executed checks are available in an HTML report for manual review.

Available at: `/-/checks/index.html`

### Scheduled checks

The live site [Environment](/docs/infrastructure.md#hosting) is automatically verified via a cron job running on the
BAS central workstations:

- scope: all items
- frequency: Wednesdays at 12:15 (local time)
- results: [data.bas.ac.uk/-/checks/](https://data.bas.ac.uk/-/checks/)
- logs: `/users/geoweb/cron_logs/lantern/lantern-verify-*.log`
- log retention: 90 days (enforced monthly)
- deployment: via [Ansible](/docs/deployment.md#site-checks-script)
